Inverse Design of Frequency Selective Surface
Using Physics-Informed Neural Networks
Yu-Hang Liu, Bing-Zhong Wang, and Ren Wang
Institute of Applied Physics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China ,Chengdu, 611731, China
(bzwang@uestc.edu.cn)
Abstract—This paper uses Physics-Informed Neural Network
(PINN) to design Frequency Selective Surface (FSS). PINN
integratesphysicalinformationintothelossfunction,sotraining
PINN does not require a dataset, which will be faster than
traditional neural networks for inverse design. The specific
implementationprocessofthispaperistoconstructaPINNusing
field solutions of mode matching method, and given the design
goal,thePINNcantraintheshapeofthediaphragm.Thesingle
frequencyFSSthatmeetsthedesigngoalwasdesignedusingthe
inverse design method proposed in this paper without a dataset,
verifying the rationality of using PINN to design metasurfaces.
Using PINN for inverse design is not limited to single frequency
FSS, but can also be used for more complex metasurface.
I. INTRODUCTION
Fig.1. FSSunitcellininfinitearrays.
In 2019, Raissi et al. [1] first proposed PINN, which
has since attracted widespread attention. PINN achieves the
The four sides of the unit cell satisfy periodic boundary
goal of training without a dataset by incorporating physical
conditions, and the form of its electromagnetic field solution
information into the loss function. PINN was first developed
can be described by the Floquet mode.
in fluid mechanics, for example, Mehta et al. [2] obtained
On the domain x∈(0,a),y ∈(0,a), the shape function of
a variable order fractional model using PINN to predict the
the two-layer diaphragms is:
meanvelocitydistributionandReynoldsstressatanyReynolds
(cid:40)
number. Gradually, PINN also began to be applied in the 1, Vacuum,z =z
g (x,y)= i ,i=1,2 (1)
electromagnetics [3], [4]. Chen and Lu et al. used PINN for i 0, PEC,z =z
i
metamaterialdesigntosolvetheproblemofinversescattering
The incident wave is TE . The mode matching method is
of dielectric [5]. In addition, Chen et al. also used PINN to 00
used on both sides of the metal diaphragms to establish the
solve the inverse design problem of the shape of scatterers in
interaction relationship between the metal diaphragm and the
electromagnetic devices [6]. These studies indicate that PINN
electromagneticfields.Equation(2)showstheprincipleofthe
can be used for inverse design of electromagnetic structures,
field solution of the model.
but current inverse designs are all dielectric-loaded and there
have been few issues with metal-loaded. (cid:88) (cid:75)(cid:88)
C (E ,H )=g C (E ,H )
i t(i) t(i) i+1 t(i+1) t(i+1)
Based on the advantages of PINN, it can be applied in (2)
inverse design. In this paper, PINN is used for inverse design where, (cid:80) appliestomodes.C representthemodecoefficients
i
of single frequency FSS. In Section II, a method for inverse ofthe(i-th)region,E andH representthetangentialelectro-
t t
designing FSS using PINN is proposed. In Section III, the magneticfieldsinFloquetmode. (cid:74) representstheinteraction
training results are presented and simulated. In Section IV, relationship between the diaphragms and the electromagnetic
analysis and outlook are conducted on this method. fields: when g = 0, Equation (2) satisfies that the tangential
electric field is 0; when g = 1, Equation (2) satisfies the
II. METHOD boundary condition that the tangential electromagnetic fields
are continuous at the interface of the dielectric and vacuum.
ThedesignedFSSconsistsofFSSunitcellsarrangedtightly
Usually, the inverse design goal of FSS can be represented
toformaninfiniterectangulararray,andtheunitcellisshown
by S parameters, which can be represented by certain mode
inFigure1.Thestructureoftheunitcellconsistsofonelayer
coefficients. The control equation, boundary conditions, and
ofdielectricandtwolayersofdiaphragm.Thediaphragmsare
designgoaloftheinversedesignproblemarealreadyincluded
Perfect Electric Conductor (PEC) with negligible thickness,
in Equation (2), and the loss function L can be directly
attached to both sides of the dielectric. The thickness of the
constructed using the 2-norm of the residual in (2).
medium in the unit is d, and the relative dielectric constant is
ε , the cross-section is a square with a side length of a. L=||res(Eq.(2))||2 (3)
r 2
4202
naJ
8
]hp-ppa.scisyhp[
1v68630.1042:viXra

---PAGE---

Only g (x,y) in L has not been solved. Using a fully is 15.288GHz, indicating that ϵ=1.92%. The training model
i
connected neural network (FCNN) to generate the structure can meet the requirements of the design goal very well, and
of the metal diaphragms g (x,y), obtaining res(Eq.(2)) by thus we have successfully used the PINN method to inverse
i
interacting g (x,y) with the electromagnetic field through design the FSS that matches the design goal.
i
(cid:74)
operator , the final PINN model is shown in Figure 2.
Fig.2. PINNmodel.
Aftersettingthedesigngoal,thebackpropagationalgorithm
is used to correct the mode coefficients and parameters in
the FCNN until the loss function approaches 0, and then the
g (x,y) obtained is the final shape of the diaphragms.
i Fig.4. S21 oftrainingFSS.
III. EXAMPLE
IV. CONCLUSION
Using the PINN model in Section II, an FSS is trained to
Using PINN, this paper successfully designed the FSS that
meet the design goal.
meets the set inverse design goal. Due to the fact that PINN
A. Train does not require a dataset, it is more efficient than using
traditional neural networks for inverse design. This paper
The design goal is to not transmit electromagnetic waves
introduces PINN into the design of FSS for the first time,
at a frequency of 15GHz, set |S (12GHz)| = 0.99,
21 and numerical experiment have proven the correctness of this
|S (15GHz)| = 0.1, |S (18GHz)| = 0.99 for TE
21 21 00 method. Although this paper takes FSS as an example, this
mode at Port 2. In the Equation (2), 121 TE modes and 121
method is not limited to FSS. In fact, many electromagnetic
TM modes are used. For dielectric, d = 2mm, ε = 3.2,
r devicescanbedesignedusingthismethod,whichwillpromote
a=10mm.IntheFCNN,thereare3hiddenlayers,andeach
the development of inverse design of electromagnetic devices.
hidden layer has 32 neurons. The optimizer is Adam.
Setthetrainingstepsto10k,acceleratebyGPU(A800),and ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
complete the training in one hour, four minutes, and twelve
This work was supported in part by the National Nat-
seconds. Finally, the shape of the FSS diaphragms is shown
ural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62171081
in Figure 3.
and U2341207, the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan
Province under Grant 2022NSFSC0039, and the Aeronautical
Science Foundation of China under Grant 2023Z06208002.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. Karniadakis, “Physics-informed neural
networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse
problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations,” J. Comput.
Phys.,vol.378,pp.686–707,2019.
[2] P. P. Mehta, G. Pang, F. Song, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Discovering a
universalvariable-orderfractionalmodelforturbulentcouetteflowusing
(a) (b) a physics-informed neural network,” Fract. Calc. Appl. Anal., vol. 22,
no.6,pp.1675–1688,2019.
Fig.3. TheshapeofFSSdiaphragms.(a)g1(x,y);(b)g2(x,y).
[3] Y. Zhang, H. Fu, Y. Qin, K. Wang, and J. Ma, “Physics-informed
B. Simulation deep neural network for inhomogeneous magnetized plasma parameter
inversion,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagat. Lett., vol. 21, no. 4,
Simulate the structure using the frequency domain solver
pp.828–832,2022.
of full wave simulation software, and the S 21 at Port 2 was [4] S. Li, Z. Liu, S. Fu, Y. Wang, and F. Xu, “Intelligent beamforming via
obtained as shown in Figure 4. physics-inspired neural networks on programmable metasurface,” IEEE
Trans.AntennasPropag.,vol.70,no.6,pp.4589–4599,2022.
Define the error as Equation (4):
[5] Y.Chen,L.Lu,G.E.Karniadakis,andL.D.Negro,“Physics-informed
f −f neuralnetworksforinverseproblemsinnano-opticsandmetamaterials,”
ϵ= train goal ×% (4) Opt.Express,vol.28,no.8,pp.11618–11633,Apr2020.
f goal [6] Y. Chen and L. Dal Negro, “Physics-informed neural networks for
imaging and parameter retrieval of photonic nanostructures from near-
From Figure 4, it can be seen that the frequency corre-
fielddata,”APLPhotonics,vol.7,no.1,p.010802,012022.
sponding to the minimum value of S for the training model
21

---PAGE---

