1
LLM-RIMSA: Large Language Models driven
Reconfigurable Intelligent Metasurface Antenna
Systems
Yunsong Huang, Hui-Ming Wang Senior Member, IEEE, Qingli Yan and Zhaowei Wang
Abstract—The evolution of 6G networks demands ultra- A. Technological Evolution of RIMSA
massive connectivity and intelligent radio environments, yet
existingreconfigurableintelligentsurface(RIS)technologiesface RIS technologies are broadly categorized into three types,
critical limitations in hardware efficiency, dynamic control, and each with unique challenges and application scenarios. The
scalability.ThispaperintroducesLLM-RIMSA,atransformative
first type is reflective RIS, which passively reflects incident
frameworkthatintegrateslargelanguagemodels(LLMs)witha
signalstoenhancecoveragewithoutrelyingonradiofrequency novel reconfigurable intelligent metasurface antenna (RIMSA)
architecture to address these challenges. Unlike conventional (RF) chains [4]. The programmable manipulation of reflected
RIS designs, RIMSA employs parallel coaxial feeding and 2D signal phase and amplitude enables precise beam steering
metasurface integration, enabling each individual metamaterial through RIS. Emerging research has validated RIS transfor-
element to independently adjust both its amplitude and phase.
mative potential across key wireless communication metrics:
While traditional optimization and deep learning (DL) methods
channel capacity maximization [5]- [7], energy consumption
strugglewithhigh-dimensionalstatespacesandprohibitivetrain-
ingcostsforRIMSAcontrol,LLM-RIMSAleveragespre-trained minimization [8], and secure transmission via physical-layer
LLMs cross-modal reasoning and few-shot learning capabilities encryption [9]. However, this approach suffers from double-
to dynamically optimize RIMSA configurations. Simulations path fading. Active RIS variants address this issue by am-
demonstrate that LLM-RIMSA achieves state-of-the-art perfor-
plifying signals but introduce high power consumption and
mance, outperforming conventional DL-based methods in sum
increased hardware complexity [10].
ratewhilereducingtrainingoverhead.Theproposedframework
pave the way for LLM-driven intelligent radio environments. The second type is transmissive RIS, which directs signals
through the metasurface to fill coverage gaps. Nevertheless,
Index Terms—Large language models, reconfigurable intelli-
gent metasurface antenna, wireless communications. itincurssignificantinsertionloss,reducingapertureefficiency
[11].ThethirdtypeisradiativeRIS,suchasdynamicmetasur-
faceantennas(DMA)andreconfigurableholographicsurfaces
(RHS), which integrate radiation and phase-shifting capa-
I. INTRODUCTION
bilities [12]. However, DMA waveguide-based architecture
introducesfrequencyselectivityduetoLorentzian-constrained
THE sixth-generation (6G) wireless networks aim to sup-
elements and propagation delays [13], while RHS relies on
port ultra-massive connectivity for emerging applica-
holographic interference patterns that are limited to amplitude
tions like Internet of things (IoT) ecosystems, holographic
modulation [14]. Furthermore, both approaches employ serial
communications, and tactile internet, which demand unprece-
feeding, leading to uneven excitation and increased control
dented spectral efficiency, sub-millisecond latency, and three-
complexity.
dimensional coverage [1]. While traditional massive MIMO
To address the limitations of existing RIS technologies,
and millimeter-wave technologies enhance spectral efficiency,
we propose the reconfigurable intelligent metasurface antenna
phased arrays face critical limitations in hardware cost, power
(RIMSA), a novel radiative RIS architecture. At its core,
consumption, and energy efficiency, particularly as antenna
RIMSA employs parallel coaxial feeding, a departure from
scales expand to extra-large MIMO (XL-MIMO). These chal-
traditional serial-fed designs. This innovative feeding mecha-
lenges have spurred the development of reconfigurable intel-
nism excites all metasurface elements simultaneously through
ligent surfaces (RIS) [2], a disruptive hardware paradigm that
apowerdistributionnetwork,effectivelyeliminatingfrequency
dynamically manipulates electromagnetic wave propagation
selectivity and propagation delays that have long plagued
to enable low-cost, energy-efficient, and intelligent wireless
systems like DMA [15]. A key feature of RIMSA is its incor-
environments [3].
poration of amplitude-phase joint modulation, which enables
each individual metamaterial element to independently adjust
both its amplitude and phase. Importantly, this independent
Yunsong Huang, Hui-Ming Wang, and Zhaowei Wang are with the
control over amplitude and phase for every single unit is
School of Information and Communications Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong
University, Xi’an 710049, China (e-mail: song1102@stu.xjtu.edu.cn; xjb- critical to achieving high-precision beamforming, enhancing
swhm@gmail.com;wangzwssd@stu.xjtu.edu.cn). signaldirectivity,andenablingefficientmulti-userinterference
QingliYaniswiththeSchoolofComputerScience&Technology,Xi’an
suppression.SuchcapabilitiesmakeRIMSAparticularlywell-
University of Posts & Telecommunications, Xi’an 710121, Shaanxi, China
(e-mail:yql@xupt.edu.cn) suited for dense communication environments where fine-
5202
guA
81
]PS.ssee[
1v82721.8052:viXra

---PAGE---

2
grained control and adaptability are essential [16]. Addition- C. LLM Driven RIMSA Control
ally, RIMSA adopts a compact 2D integration design, where
Large language models (LLMs) [36] are finding diverse
the metasurface serves as the radiating aperture. By avoiding
applications in wireless communications, enhancing various
bulky waveguides, this design significantly reduces hardware
aspects of network performance and user experience [37].
complexityandphysicalfootprint,supportingscalabledeploy-
They enable intuitive customer support, protocol optimiza-
ment in compact and resource-constrained environments.
tion through network scenario simulation [38], and advanced
network analytics for fault detection and automated reporting
B. Limitations of Model and DL Driven RIS Control Methods [39].Atthephysicallayer,LLMsoptimizecriticalparameters
like beamforming directions to improve signal coverage [40].
Despite these advantages, scaling such systems to support
LLM4CP demonstrates how fine-tuned GPT achieves high-
thousands of reconfigurable elements remains hindered by
precision channel prediction by aligning channel characteris-
unresolved control challenges [17]. Traditional optimization-
tics with LLM feature spaces [41].
based RIS control methods [18] excel in model-driven
LLMs bridge semantic environmental understanding with
frameworks via channel estimation-parameter optimization
physical-layer beamforming, revolutionizing RIMSA control.
paradigms. Representative techniques like convex relaxation
Unlike model-driven approaches, LLMs infer latent relation-
[19], block coordinate descent [20], and alternating opti-
ships between dynamic channel states and optimal RIMSA
mization[21]achievenear-theoretical-limitperformance(e.g.,
configurations through context-aware reasoning [42], [43].
sum-rate [22]) under precise channel state information (CSI),
Pre-trained LLMs, fine-tuned on sparse experimental data,
offering convergence guarantees and computational efficiency
generalize beamforming policies across diverse deployment
in low-dimensional scenarios [23]. However, they face critical
scenarios [44], enabling real-time, model-agnostic control and
limitations:First,explicitchannelestimationincursprohibitive
transforming passive hardware into self-optimizing cognitive
pilotoverheadforlarge-scalesystems[8];Second,non-convex
systems [45]. Compared to traditional methods, LLMs exhibit
constraints (e.g., unit modulus) amplify complexity, while
superior scalability and computational efficiency by process-
static formulations lack adaptability to dynamic environments
ing heterogeneous data streams [41], while their continuous
[24]. These scalability and practicality bottlenecks hinder
learning capabilities ensure robustness against time-varying
deployment in complex wireless networks [25].
channels and user mobility [46]. Additionally, LLMs expo-
Deep learning (DL) based approaches have emerged as
sure to diverse training corpora enhances pattern recognition,
innovative solutions for controlling RIS, demonstrating sig-
enablingdeeperinsightsintopropagationmechanismsthrough
nificant advantages in model-free optimization [26]. Among
semantic-channel feature alignment [47].
these DL methods, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) [27]
Recent advancements in LLMs have demonstrated their
andgraphneuralnetworks(GNNs)[28]standoutasrepresen-
exceptional ability to model complex temporal and spatial
tativetechniques[29].DRLmethodmodelsRISconfiguration
relationships in cross-modal tasks. Different from prompt-
throughamarkovdecisionprocess[30],thisapproachdynam-
based WirelessLLM proposed in [48], which focuses on
icallyadaptstocomplexradioenvironmentswithoutrequiring
integrating multimodal data such as text, signals, and pro-
sub-channel CSI, significantly enhancing system performance
tocols, and enhancing domain knowledge through retrieval-
metrics like sum rate [31]. GNN architecture implicitly es-
augmentedgeneration(RAG)andexternaltools,LLM-RIMSA
timate channels, directly mapping received pilot signals to
emphasizes the design of specialized modules to adjust the
optimal beamforming and reflection coefficients [32]. The
model architecture to the input feature space of LLMs. Fur-
permutation invariant/equivariant properties of GNNs effec-
thermore, LLM employs parameter freezing and fine-tuning
tively capture multi-user interference while incorporating het-
strategies to retain the general knowledge of the pre-trained
erogeneous data like user locations, achieving near-perfect
model while enhancing its generalization capabilities. As a
CSI performance under limited pilot lengths [33]. However,
result,comparedtoWirelessLLM,LLM-RIMSAdemonstrates
DRL suffers from dependency on extensive environmental
distinct advantages in achieving high prediction accuracy and
interaction data and slow training convergence, with potential
stronggeneralizationperformance.Byleveragingtheuniversal
inefficiencies in exploring high-dimensional RIS phase spaces
modelingcapabilitiesofLLMs,wecanbypassexplicitchannel
[34].GNNs,despitetheirinterpretability,faceescalatingcom-
estimation, and reduce dependency on exhaustive trial-and-
putational complexity as user and reflection unit quantities
error learning. This paper proposes LLM-RIMSA, the first
increase, coupled with reliance on offline training data and
framework to harness LLMs for real-time RIMSA configu-
limited adaptability to dynamic channel variations [35].
ration in wireless systems. Our key contributions are:
Both approaches must overcome critical deployment chal-
lenges:thecomplexhigh-dimensionalcontroldemandsarising RIMSA architecture innovation: Introduces a novel
•
from thousands of RIMSA elements requiring precise ampli- RIMSA architecture with a parallel coaxial feeding net-
tude phase optimization, and the need for real-time adapta- work and 2D metasurface integration, detailing its struc-
tion to dynamic environments characterized by time-varying turaldesignandsignalmodelingasbothtransmittingand
channels and multi-user interference under constrained pilot receiving antennas.
resources. These persistent limitations highlight the necessity LLM-driven framework: Proposes the first LLM-RIMSA
•
of further studies to improve system robustness and ensure framework leveraging a GPT-2 backbone to dynami-
scalableimplementationsforlarge-scaleRIMSAdeployments. cally optimize RIMSA configurations using pilot sig-

---PAGE---

3
3
performance will be enhanced compared with conventional
CS-based channel estimation schemes. The contributions of
inthispaperareasfollows:
In our proposed architecture of the RIMSA array ca- •
pable of adaptively controlling both antenna and array ……………………………………………… ………………………………………………
responses through parallel feeding circuits. In RIMSA ……
systems,allmetamaterialelementsfeededsimultaneously ……………………………………………… ………………………………………………
byacoaxialfeednetwork.RIMSAiscomposedofphase
control circuits, metamaterial elements, power distribu-
tionnetworkandfeedports,whichensurestheisolation ………………………… ………………
betweenadjacentports. ……
We propose a TSR channel estimation method. In the ………………………… ………………
•
first stage, the same phasing shift vectors are applied to
all metasurface antennas to merge the columns of the
measurement matrix, reducing its coherence than that
Fig.2. ThearchitectureofRIMSA.
ofconventionalCS-basedapproaches.ThiswillimproFvieg.1. ThearchitectureofRIMSA.
theaccuracyofDoAsestimationbutwillalsointroduce
ambiguous DoAs. In addition, we optimize the phase multi-resolution method is proposed in [46] by developing a
shiftsofmetamaterialelementsbyquasi-Newtonmethod hniaerlasr,cehlicimalicnoadteibnogokexbpasleicditonsuthbe-chhyabrnidnealrcChiSteIcteusrtei.mation.The
to ensure the received power keeping robust. In the fraUmnleikweotrhke wbroirdkgseisn h[4i1g]h,-wdihmichendsiiroecntalyl ocphtiamninzeesl tdheata and
secondstage,weuseRiemannianmanifoldalgorithmto phaseshiftmatrixwithgivengrids,ourproposedTSRchannel metasurface control through end-to-end optimization.
optimizethephaseadjustmentofmetamaterialelements estimationschemewithRIMSAdecreasesthecoherenceofthe
Cross-modal data processing: Introduces a space domain
to refine the groundtruth arrival angles from the DoA • measurement matrix by reducing the dimension of measure-
candidate set, and calculate the channel attenuations, mpreenptrmoacterisxsicnoglummnso.dOuuler baansidc ipdoeasiitsiothnaatl, ienmoburedspdeicniagl layers
where the DoAs ambiguity introduced in the first stage dtoesiagdn,apsotmLeLdMiffserefnotrDhoiAghs-mdiamyehnasvieonthaelsRamIMe SreAspopnaserameter
iseliminated. vceocntotrr,owlhwichhiwleillprreedsuecervtihnegcoshpearetnioceteomfpthoeramleacsourrermeleanttions in
We present the numerical performance analysis and re- matrix. This is significantly different with the grid matching
• wireless channels.
sults of the proposed scheme in RIMSA systems. We pursuitstrategyin[42]andtheNewtonrefinementmethodin
alsoprovidethecomparisonofchannelestimationperfor- [P4e3]r.foInrmadadnitcioen,vwaleidcaotnisoidne:rSthiemoupltiamtiiozantsiondeomf tohenspthraastee- LLM- •
mancewithsomeexistingschemes.Thenumericalresults sRhiIfMtinSgAvecatcohritoeveenssuhreigthhaetrthseurmeceuivseedrproawteercionmthpeawrheodleto con-
illustratethatourmethodcanprovideabetterestimation ivnetenretisotendalDoDARrLangmeeisthloardgeaenndougGhN, wNhicmhehtahsodno,twbeiethn lower
accuracy. consideredinthepreviousworks.
training and inference cost. The framework supports
adaptive deployment across large scale wireless commu-
A. RelatedWorks B. Organization
nications scenarios, establishing a universal solution for
In our proposed architecture of the RIMSA array, each This paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we will
intelligent radio environments.
metasurface antenna is connected to an RF chain and the introducetheRIMSAarraymodelindetail.Thechannelesti-
wholereceiverstructureissimilartoahybridMIMOsystem.Thmeatrioenstproobflemthdisueptoaptheeranitsennoargstaruncitzueredwailslbefoinlltroowdusc.edSection
Therefore, we can use the channel estimation methods wIitIhprienseSnectstiotnheIII.syInstSeemctiomnoIdVe,lweanpdrespernotbplreomposefdortmwou-lsatatgioen. The
hybrid MIMO systems as starting points for RIMSA. Tohpetim re i fi z n a e t m io e n nt p (T ro S b R l ) e m m eth i o s d. fo T r h m en u , l w at e ed ana a ly s ze a co L m L p M utata p io ro na b l lem in
works in [40], [41], [42], [43], [44], [45], [46] address the complexityinSectionV.Simulationresultsandanalyzeswill
SectionIII.SectionIVproposesaLLMbackboneforRIMSA
CSchannelestimationforhybridMIMOsystemsundersparse begiveninSectionVI.SectionVIIisconclusionofthispaper.
multipathchannels. control. Section V provides simulation results and Section VI
Alltheworksin[40],[41],[42],[43],[44]focusonenhancco-ncludes the paper. II. SYSTEMMODEL
ing CS-based channel estimation through grid optimization
In this section, we discuss the architecture of RIMSA in
in the CS framework. The non-uniformly quantized angle
grids are used in [40], which reduce the coherence of the
II-A. The channel ImIo.deSl
Y
of
ST
R
E
IM
M
SAMa
O
rr
D
ay
EL
will be described
insectionII-B.
measurement matrix to improve the performance. To furthAe.r RIMSA Architecture
improvetheperformanceviareducingcoherence,theauthors
in[41]employconvexoptimizationtodesignthemeasurementThAe. RRIMIMSASAarchrietepcrtuerseents a highly adaptable metasurface
matrix. The works in [42], [43], [44] provide approachesainntennaT,hecaRpIMabSlAeiosfafldeyxnibalmyciconfiagdujurasbtlmemenettasaunrfdacereacnotennfinag,uration
refinement of the grid. A distributed grid matching pursuit allowing for adaptation and reconfiguration according to the
in response to varying wireless environments. As depicted in
(DGMP)algorithmisproposedin[42],andaNewtonrefine- wireless environment. As shown in Fig.2, one RIMSA com-
Fig. 1, the structure of a RIMSA incorporates phase-shifting
mentmethodfordiscretegridisconsideredin[43]. prises phase-shifting circuits, metamaterial elements, power
Regardinggridlessapproaches,theauthorsin[45]develcoiprcuditisst,rimbuetitoanmnaettweroiraklaenldemfeeedntpso,rtas.pTohwepehradseisctornibtruotlicoinrcunitetwork,
the sparse signal recovery problem with an unknown paaran-d offeeedachpomretsta.maEtearciahl emleemteanmtaitserrieasplonesliebmleefnotr apdhjuassteingcontrol
metric dictionary, and propose an iterative reweighted (IcRi)rcutihteipshatsaeskoefdEMwisthignmal,owduhilcahtinisgcotmhepospehdasoef aovfartahcetore,lectro-
method to decrease the surrogate function. Furthermore, the transmission line and short stub. Specifically, by regulating
magnetic (EM) signal, utilizing a varactor, transmission line,
and short stub. By adjusting the control voltage applied to the
phase control circuit, the capacitance of the varactors can be
tuned,therebyalteringthephaseresponseofthecorresponding
metamaterial element. The phase-shifting mechanism depends
on the phase control circuit, enabling continuous phase mod-
ulation of the EM wave and facilitating analog beamforming.
The RF power is evenly distributed across all metamaterial
elementsviathepowerdistributionnetwork,whichisrealized
using microstrip line power dividers. The feed ports include
a primary feed port along with auxiliary ports for power
N Ex
N Ey
N
R y
N Rx
Ny
y
N x
O
z
x

Power divider
/combiner
RF chain
Fig.2. AplanarRIMSAarraywithNRy NRx antennas(RFchains)anda
totalofNxNymetamaterialelements,whereeachRIMSAisaplanarantenna
aswellwithNEy NEx elements.
division. These four core components are tightly integrated,
ensuring a compact overall antenna design. All metamaterial
elements are simultaneously excited by the incoming signal
and subsequently directed to the RF chain and digital pro-
cessor through a parallel feed network, mitigating frequency
selectivity commonly encountered in antenna architecture of
DMA and RHS.
Traditional hybrid analog-digital MIMO architectures typ-
ically depend on specialized analog combining hardware,
such as phase shifter networks, which inherently consume
significant power due to the active tuning demands of the
phaseshifters.Incontrast,theradiationpatternofaRIMSAis
generatedthroughdynamicallytunablemetamaterialelements.
These elements are embedded within a parallel feeding net-
work,primarilycomposedofpassivecomponentslikevaractor
diodes, leading to a marked reduction in power consumption.
Additionally,thelimitedresponsespeedofconventionalphase
shifters results in fixed radiationpatterns during a single sym-
bol period in traditional hybrid MIMO systems. However, the
RIMSA achieves symbol-level beam reconfiguration, thanks
to the sub-nanosecond response time of varactor diodes. This
allowsthemetamaterialelementstobeswiftlyreconfiguredby
thecontrolcircuitrywithinasinglesymbolduration,enabling
real-time adaptation to rapidly changing channel conditions.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, a general RIMSA antennas con-
sists of N = N N densely spaced subwavelength
E Ex
×
Ey
metamaterial elements. The RIMSA array is composed of
N = N N RIMSAs connected to RF chains. The
R Rx
×
Ry
RIMSA array consists of N = N N N N =
t Ex Rx
×
Ey Ry
N N in total elements. Integrated electromagnetic wave
x y
×
control and reconfiguration is achieved through dynamic con-
figuration of the metamaterial elements phase responses. For
n =1,2...,N ,n =1,2,...,N ,theeffectofphaseshifting
r R e E
of metamaterial elements is v
nr,ne
= e−jαnr,ne which is the
weighting factor of n th metamaterial element of n th RF
e r
chain. α denotes the phase shift. We define vector v
nr,ne nr

---PAGE---

4
as the phase shift vector of n th RF chain, which is
r
z
v =1/ (cid:112) N [v ,v ,...,v ]T . (1)
nr E nr,1 nr,2 nr,NE
RIMSA
B. Signal Model
y
We consider a MISO system that includes a base station Base Station
(BS) and K single-antenna users. The BS equipped with a
ϕ𝑘 θ𝑘
RIMSAismadeupofuniformplanararray(UPA).Themobile x
user is equipped with an omnidirectional antenna as Fig. 3.
The uplink channel characteristics between the base station
and user k are characterized by h k RNt×1. In traditional User 2 User k
∈ User 1
methods, CSI acquisition precedes data transmission through
uplink pilot signaling. Leveraging channel reciprocity, the
downlink channels correspond to the transpose of uplink esti-
mates.Specifically,userk transmitsalength-Lpilotsequence Fig.3. SimulationlayoutofRIMSAassistedmultiusersystem.
x (ℓ),ℓ = 1, ,L. The BS received signal in time slot ℓ is
k
···
expressed as: to positional stability, while the NLoS component h
k,NLoS
K denotes the fast fading NLoS component, and the component
(cid:88)
y(ℓ)= VHh k x k (ℓ)+VHn(ℓ), (2) of which is independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
k=1 circularlysymmetriccomplexGaussianrandomvariableswith
where n(ℓ) (cid:0) 0,σ2I (cid:1) is the additive white Gaussian zero-mean and unit variance. The LoS component is position-
noise (AWGN ∼ ). C V N CN 1 t×NR represents the beamforming dependent and slow-time-varying; The NLoS components are
∈ causedbythemulti-patheffectsandarethusfast-time-varying.
matrix at the RIMSA array as:
As illustrated in Fig. 3, the LoS channel depends on user-
 
v 1 0 ... 0 RIMSA geometric relationships. Let ϕ k and θ k respectively
 0 v 2 ... 0  denote the azimuth and elevation angles of arrival from user
V= 

. .
.
. .
.
... . .
.
 

(3) k to RIMSA. The n-th element of the RIMSA steering vector
a (ϕ ,θ ) is given by:
0 0 0 v R k k
NR
w I h e e n r s e u v re n s r t i h s a i t n t t h h e ef n o o rm ise of p ( r 1 es ). er T v h e e s u i n ts ita s r t y at p is r t o ic p a e l rty pr V op H er V tie = s, [a R (ϕ k ,θ k )] n = ej2π λ d c R{i1(n)sin(ϕk)cos(θk)+i2(n)sin(θk)} ( , 6)
where d represents the inter-element spacing, and λ is the
with its distribution and power remaining unchanged. We R c
carrier wavelength, i (n) = mod(n 1,√N ), and i (n) =
assumechannelreciprocity,sothatthechannelmatricesinthe 1 − t 2
(n 1)/√N which is the index of n-th element. In the
dow Le n t li s n k k di C rec d ti e o n n ot a e re th t e he m t o ra d n u s la p t o e s d e s o y f m th b e ol u t p ra li n n s k m c i h tt a e n d n f e r l o s m . s ⌊ imu − lations, w t e ⌋ assume d R = λ 2 c without loss of generality.
the BS to ∈ user k. The received signal at user k is modeled as: This leads to the LoS channel expression:
r =hHVw s + (cid:88) hHVw s +n , (4) h k,LoS =a R (ϕ k ,θ k ). (7)
k k k k k i i k
i̸=k Let (x ,y ,z ) denote the location of the user k and
k k k
wheren
k ∼CN
(cid:0) 0,σ
0
2(cid:1) isAWGN,w
i ∈
CNR×1 isthedigital (x R ,y R ,z R ) denote the location of the RIMSA, we have
precoding vector. sin(ϕ )cos(θ )= y k − y R,sin(θ )= z k − z R, (8)
k k d k d
k k
C. Channel Model where d is the distance between RIMSA and the user k.
k
WeassumethattheRIMSAisdeployedatalocationwhere
a line-of-sight channel exists between RIMSA and the users, III. OPTIMIZATIONPROBLEMFORLLM-RIMSA
so the Rician fading channel model h k for the RIMSA-user k In this section, we introduce the optimization goal and loss
link is expressed as: function for RIMSA control of LLM.
(cid:32)(cid:114) (cid:114) (cid:33)
(cid:112) K 1
h k = L k K+1 h k,LoS + K+1 h k,NLoS , (5) A. Optimization Problem
Since the number of elements N in a typical RIMSA is
t
where L k ≜ L 1 d− k ρk, LB 1 E represents the large-scale path generally large (possibly in thousands), it is challenging to
loss with d ≜ p p denoting the RIMSA-user k estimatethechannels.Themainideaofthispaperisthatsince
k R k
∥ − ∥
distance and ρ being the path loss exponents. The Rician the final goal is to optimize the rates R , instead of explicitly
k k
factorK quantifiesthepowerratiobetweenline-of-sight(LoS) estimatingallthechannelcoefficientsasanintermediarystep,
and non-line-of-sight (NLoS) components. The deterministic wecanexploitthepilotphasemoreefficientlybymappingthe
LoS component h exhibits slow temporal variation due received pilots directly to the optimized transmission strategy
k,LoS

---PAGE---

5
for data rate maximization, in effect, bypassing channel esti- optimization objectives. During the training phase, the hybrid
mation. loss function is formulated as follows:
Under a block-fading channel model, channel parameters
= +λ +λ , (13)
remain constant within coherence intervals but vary indepen- L total L mse rate L rate precoding L fro
dently across blocks. The corresponding signal-to-noise ratio where denotes the channel estimation MSE loss as:
mse
L
(SINR) metric becomes:
= Hˆ H 2, (14)
SINR k = (cid:80)K i̸=k (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) w w k H i H V V H H h h k k (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) 2 2 +σ k 2 . (9) r w e h fl e e r c e ts H th t e ru s th um is d t a L h t e m a s r e tr a u te th ∥ ac v c a E o lu r − d e in o g f tr t w o ut i h r ( e 1 ∥ l 1 F e ) ss as c : hannel. 1 L rate
The achievable rate for user k is computed as: K K
(cid:88) (cid:88)
= R = log (1+SINR ), (15)
R =log(1+SINR ), (10) L rate − k − 2 k
k k k=1 k=1
where is determined by V and W according to (11),
where multiuser interference is treated as noise. The RIMSA rate
L
optimizes digital precoding vectors w k and RIMSA beam- and L rate is a negative value, because the LLM model will
forming matrix V to maximize a network utility function minimizethehybirdloss.BeingnegativecanhelpLLMmodel
U(R ...R ). Typical utility functions include system sum- optimizeRIMSAconfigurationtoachievemaximumsumdata
1 K
rate (cid:80)K k=1 R k . rate. L fro correspond to zero force (ZF) precoding matrix
Frobenius norm loss as:
The system-level performance is quantified through the
sum-rate capacity: = M VW 2, (16)
L fro ∥ − ∥F
(cid:88) K (cid:88) K where M CNR×K is the ZF precoding matrix and can
R sum = R k = log 2 (1+SINR k ), (11) help LLM ∈ model faster optimize its parameters [30]. L λ fro is
rate
k=1 k=1
increasing with training epochs increases, so the optimization
TheoptimizationforRIMSA-enhancedsystemsistocontrol process will tend to maximum sum data rate. In addition, the
RIMSA beamforming matrix V CNt×NR and digital pre- validation loss also adopts as loss function. It is worth
coding matrix W CNR×K to m ∈ aximum the sum data rate noting that the multi-head a L tt r e at n e tion and feed forward layers
∈
R sum . To this end, we propose to design the optimal beam- ofthepre-trainedGPT-2arefrozen,whileotherparametersof
formingvectorw k andRIMSAbeamformingmatrixV based the network are trainable. Since the former includes the main
directly on the received pilots Y = [y(1),y(2), ,y(L)] parametersofthenetwork,thenumberoftrainableparameters
CNR×L. Specifically, given the matrix Y, our go · a · l · is to solv ∈ e isrelativelysmall.Themodelwiththesmallestvalidationloss
the following optimization problem according to (10): is saved for the testing phase.
maximize E[R (W,V),...,R (W,V)]
1 K
W,V=g(Y) IV. THELLMMODELFORRIMSACONTROL
s.t W=[w , ,w ],
w 2 1 P ··· , K (12) In this section, we introduce how to apply a pre-
∥ i ∥ ≤ max trained LLM model on RIMSA control. The proposed LLM-
VHV=I,
empowered RIMSA control framework integrates temporal
where W is the digital precoding matrix of RIMSA. Solving feature extraction, spatio-temporal attention encoding, a GPT-
problem (12) faces critical challenges from two perspectives: based backbone, and joint multi-task outputs. The detailed
(1) The large number of RIMSA elements (possibly in implementation is structured in Fig. 4.
thousands) makes explicit channel estimation impractical due The proposed LLM-RIMSA framework establishes an end-
to prohibitive pilot overhead scaling. to-end signal processing architecture through four synergistic
(2) Even with perfect CSI, the high-dimensional RIMSA components: Preprocessor module converts raw pilot signals
configurationoptimizationinvolvesanonconvexcombinatorial into noise-robust temporal-spatial representations via multi-
search space with complexity growing exponentially with N , scale convolutional filtering and bidirectional sequence mod-
t
rendering traditional convex relaxation methods computation- eling; Spatio-temporal attention module decouples and refines
ally intractable. joint signal dependencies using parallelized temporal corre-
lation learning and spatial affinity modeling; LLM module
Toaddressthesedualchallenges,weproposeLLM-RIMSA
leverages pretrained GPT-2 transformers with adaptive posi-
to learn the mapping from pilot signals to optimal configura-
tional encoding and residual refinement blocks to generate
tions through neural network parameter learning, bypassing
high-dimensional semantic embeddings; Output module im-
explicit channel estimation while embedding physical con-
plementsdual-taskdecodingwithphysicalconstraintsenforce-
straints in the optimization process.
ment,producingphasecontrolmatricesandchannelestimation
parameters through task-specific nonlinear projections. This
B. Training Loss Configuration
1In fact, an explicit channel estimation is only for training, the RIMSA
The proposed neural network is trained on pilot signals to
configurations will be optimized by LLM model when receives the uplink
controlRIMSAwithahybridlossfunctioncombiningmultiple pilotsignals.

---PAGE---

6
Preprocessor Spatiotemporal Attention LLM Module Output Module
Module Module
Output
Time GPT-2
attention Backbone 4 2 ×Phase
Temporal ej o r P Network e × R opti h m e i a z d ation
Si
P
g
i
n
lo
a
t
l s ex m
fe
tr o
a
a d
t
c
u
u t
r
i l
e
o e n
Bidi
L
r
S
e
T
ct
M
ional
at
S
te
p
n
a
t
c
i
e
o n al n
oi
t c
e P n o c s o it d io in n g b l a u
di s
Output
e y & Multi-layer ol
r c
Transformer k Channel
Feedforward decoder estimation
network head
Fig.4. AnillustrationofthenetworkarchitectureofLLM-RIMSA.
unified architecture achieves multi-task optimization by pro- A bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) captures long-range tem-
gressively transforming pilot signals from raw measurements poral dependencies due to its ability of contextual awareness
to control parameters through hierarchical feature abstraction and sequence alignment. After temporal feature extraction,
and context-aware reasoning. A bidirectional LSTM with hidden size N processes the
R
Remark 1: Different from prompt-based related works, compressedsequenceX ,capturinglong-rangedepen-
MaxPool
which focuses on integrating multimodal and enhancing do- dencies in both forward and backward directions:
main knowledge through RAG and external tools, LLM-
RIMSA emphasizes the design of specialized modules to ad-
X
MaxPool
RNR×2NR BiLSTM X
BiLSTM
RNR×2NR.
∈ −−−−−→ ∈
justthemodelarchitecturetotheinputfeaturespaceofLLMs. (20)
Besides, LLM-RIMSA demonstrates distinct advantages in Each direction outputs X BiLSTM , concatenation preserves
achieving high prediction accuracy and strong generalization the full temporal resolution while doubling feature richness.
performance. Forward/backwardhiddenstatesconcatenatetoform2N R -dim
embeddings,encodingbothhistoricalandfuturecontext.Input
features are permuted for temporal processing. Residual con-
A. Preprocessor Module
nections between convolutional and LSTM outputs mitigate
The temporal feature extraction module processes raw re-
vanishing gradients.
ceivedsignalsthroughacompositeconvolutionalarchitecture.
Thekeydesignrationalebehindthisarchitectureemphasizes
Given pilot signals with input dimensions Y
∈
CNR×L (N
R multi-scale feature fusion where the Conv1D-BN-Pooling
is the number of RIMSA RF chains and L is the length of
chain hierarchically extracts local-to-global patterns and the
pilot signals). So the input tensor can be expressed as
BiLSTMbridgesdistanttimestepstomitigatesignaldistortion
(cid:20) (cid:21)
X= ℜ (Y) R2×NR×L, (17) in noisy channels. Ensuring dimension consistency, the output
(Y) ∈ sizealignsperfectlywiththespatio-temporalattentionmodule
ℑ
input requirements, facilitating seamless feature propagation.
where () and () denote the real and imaginary parts of
ℜ · ℑ · This preprocessing flow transforms raw pilot signals into
the matrix, respectively. This results in a real-valued tensor
temporallycoherentandspatiallyenrichedembeddings.These
mathbfX withdimensions2 N L,wherethefirstdimen-
R
× × embeddings form the foundation for subsequent attention-
sionseparatestherealandimaginarycomponents.ReshapeX
from dimensions 2 N
R
L to 2N
R
L, i.e., X R2NR×L. based refinement and LLM-driven semantic modeling, en-
× × × ∈ hancing the overall robustness and effectiveness of signal
The preprocessor module performs temporal feature extrac-
processing in complex communication environments.
tion and bidirectional sequence modeling to generate noise-
robust representations for downstream modules.
A wide-kernel convolution Conv1D where C = 2N
out R B. Spatio-temporal Attention Module
andkernel=3expandsthefeaturedimensionwhilecapturing
local temporal correlations: As the important component of the architecture, the spatio-
temporal attention module processes the bidirectional LSTM
X ∈ R2NR×L −− C − on − v1 − D → X Conv ∈ R2NR×2NR. (18) outputs X BiLSTM and learns jointspatio-temporal dependen-
cies through a decoupled dual-attention mechanism. A novel
Then, the Gaussian error linear unit (GELU) activation and
multi-head attention architecture addresses spatial-temporal
batch normalization (BN) enhance nonlinear expressivity and
correlations.Temporalattentioncomputesdependenciesacross
stabilize training. Max pooling reduces temporal redundancy
timestepsusingscaleddot-productattention.Spatialattention
by half, prioritizing dominant features:
operates on transposed features to model inter-antenna rela-
X R2NR×2NR MaxPool1D(2) X RNR×2NR. tionships. Attention outputs are added to original features via
Conv MaxPool
∈ −−−−−−−−→ ∈
(19) residualconnections,preservedthroughlayernormalization.In

---PAGE---

7
the meanwhile, dimension permutation avoids explicit tensor
reshaping, reducing memory overhead. Position
encoding
Time attention (8-head) captures temporal dynamics across
N meta-elements using multi-head scaled dot-product atten-
R Masked multi-head
tion: attention
(cid:18) QK⊤(cid:19)
Attention(Q,K,V)=Softmax V, (21) Linear Layer
√d
T
where Q/K/V
∈
R0.5NR×0.25NR are split from X
BiLSTM
. Fe
N
ed
e
f
t
o
w
r
o
w
r
a
k
rd
The8-headoutputsareconcatenatedandprojectedtomaintain
dimension RNR×2NR. Linear Layer ×N
L
Space attention (8-head) models inter-feature relationships
among 2N R channels via parallel spatial attention heads. And Training Frozen
each head computes:
Attention space =σ (cid:0) W s · X⊤ BiLSTM (cid:1) · X BiLSTM , (22) F ne ig tw . o 5 r . k. An illustration of the network architecture of GPT-2 backbone
where W is a learnable spatial affinity matrix. The outputs
s
are fused to preserve R0.5NR×2NR. TABLEI
GPT-2MODELDIMENSIONSPECIFICATIONS
Feedforward network (FFN) applies two linear layers with
GELU activation and four hidden dimension expansion as: ModelName TypeParameter FeatureDimension
X RNR×2NR FFN X RNR×2NR. (23) GPT-2Base gpt2 768(NP =768)
BiLSTM ∈ −−−→ FFN ∈ GPT-2Medium gpt2medium 1024(NP =1024)
Feature fusion combines temporal and spatial attention
GPT-2Large gpt2-large 1280(NP =1280)
GPT-2XL gpt2-xl 1600(NP =1600)
outputs through residual addition as:
X =X +X +X . (24)
fused time space space
where P RN×NP is a trainable positional embedding
enc
The design of this module adopts a decoupled spatio- ∈
matrix according to Table I, and N denotes the maximum
temporal learning approach, where the separation of time
sequence length.
and space attention reduces computational complexity while
Then the 6-layer transformer decoder process X , each
pos
enabling targeted feature refinement. This is complemented
layer contains 12-head masked attention and 4 expanded
by a dynamic weight allocation mechanism, utilizing a dual-
feedforward networks. The 12-headcausal attention processes
head structure to adaptively prioritize critical timesteps, such
sequences with auto-regressive masking to prevent future
as sudden channel fading, and spatial features, like antenna-
information leakage as:
specific distortions. Ensuring dimension preservation, the out-
put maintains consistent dimensions of X R2NR×L,
(cid:18) QK⊤(cid:19)
fused ∈ Attention(Q,K,V)= MaskedSoftmax V,
facilitating seamless integration with the projection layer and √d
L
(26)
GPT-2 backbone. Illustrated in Fig. 4, this module generates
where d =N /12 according to Table I, multi-head outputs
context-aware spatio-temporal embeddings that encapsulate L P
are concatenated and linearly projected. 4 expanded feedfor-
both global temporal trends and local spatial correlations.
ward networks apply dimension expansion and compression
Theseembeddingsprovideessentialinductivebiasesforphase
with GELU activation:
prediction and channel estimation tasks, enhancing the accu-
racy and efficiency of communication systems.
FFN(x)=W GELU(W x+b )+b , (27)
2 1 1 2
· ·
C. LLM Module where W 1 RNP×2NP and W 2 R2NP×NP are the
∈ ∈
trainable parameters.
The LLM Module serves as the semantic reasoning core
The 4 stage residual block group enhances local feature
of the architecture, transforming spatio-temporal features into
interactions through dual-branch convolution and squeeze-
high-dimensional contextual representations. There are dif-
excitation(SE)channelattention.Thedual-branchconvolution
ferent kinds of GPT-2 models and we apply normal GPT-2
parallel depth-wise convolutions (DWConv) capture multi-
which consists of millions parameters into this problem. This
scale spatial patterns as
module comprises three key components: learnable position
e b n lo c c o k din g g ro , u N p L ( - N layer is tr s a e n t sf a o s rm 6 er th d e e r c e o ). de T r h a e nd de 4 t - a s i t l a s ge of re G si P d T u - a 2 l X conv =DWConv 3×3 (X trm ) ⊕ DWConv′ 3×3 (X trm ). (28)
L
backbone network is shown in Fig. 5. SE channel attention recalibrates feature channels via
Before learnable position encoding, X RNP is gener- squeeze-excitation as:
proj
∈
atedbyX throughprojectionlayer.Thelearnableposition
fused X =X σ(W GAP(X )). (29)
se conv c conv
encodinginjectstemporalorderinformationintotheprojected · ·
features as: The key design rationale of this module focuses on hierar-
X =X +Wp P , (25) chicalabstractionachievedthrougha6-layerTransformerthat
pos proj enc
·

---PAGE---

8
progressively builds global context via stacked self-attention LeakyReLU activation preserves negative gradient informa-
mechanisms, while residual blocks are employed to refine tion as:
local signal characteristics. Ensuring dimension compatibility, (cid:16) (cid:17)
X(2) =LeakyReLU X(1) R2048. (34)
the projection layer transforms spatio-temporal features from channel channel ∈
R2NR×L to RNP, effectively bridging these features with
Dimension reshaping reconstructs complex channel matrix
the GPT-2 input space. Leveraging pretraining compatibil-
as:
(cid:16) (cid:17)
ity, the module inherits GPT-2 pretrained weights for its Hˆ =Reshape X(2) R2×Nt×K. (35)
transformer layers, facilitating effective transfer learning in E channel ∈
wireless communication scenarios. Consequently, this module where the first dimension separates real/imaginary compo-
generates semantic-enriched embeddings RNP, which encap- nents.
sulate long-term temporal dependencies from pilot sequences, The design of this module incorporates dual-head spe-
spatialcorrelationsacrossantennaarrays,andchannel-specific cialization to efficiently handle complex signal processing
physical constraints. These enriched embeddings are then tasks. Both heads share the LLM-derived semantic features
directedtowardsdual-outputheadsforphaseoptimizationand X , promoting joint learning of correlated tasks, while
LLM
channel estimation, thereby completing the end-to-end signal engaging in task-specific processing tailored to their objec-
processing chain. tives: the phase head emphasizes signal periodicity through
The proposed architecture employs GPT-2 as its founda- GELU+LayerNorm, whereas the channel head focuses on
tional backbone, comprising 6 stacked transformer decoders matrix completeness via high-dimension expansion. Physical
with dimension-compatible modifications. The positional em- constraintsembeddingisachievedbyapplyingHardtanhinthe
bedding layer is reinitialized as trainable parameters to ac- phaseheadtoenforcephysicallimits( π,π)intoV,aligning
commodate wireless sequence lengths; Each decoder layer withRFcircuitlimitations,andR2×Nt× − K reshapingisusedto
preserves frozen 12-head attention and 4 expanded FFN from reconstruct complex channel matrices. An activation strategy
pretrained weights, while enabling fine-tuning of layer nor- utilizing LeakyReLU (with α = 0.01) prevents gradient
malization parameters and residual connections; The 4-stage death during deep fading scenarios in channel estimation, and
residual group with dual-branch DWConv and SE attention LayerNormensuresstabletrainingdespitevaryingpilotsignal
is appended as trainable extensions. This configuration main- magnitudes. This module finalizes the end-to-end processing
tainsN -dimensionalhiddenstatesthroughouttheprocessing chain, converting neural network outputs into engineering-
P
chain,ensuringcompatibilitywithalternativeLLMbackbones actionable parameters for channel estimates, phase shifting
(e.g., Llama) through dimension-preserving adapter layers matrix and beamforming matrix for RIMSA systems.
when considering computation-performance trade-offs.
V. NUMERICALRESULTS
D. Output Module
Inthissection,weevaluatetheperformanceoftheproposed
The Output Module operates as the task-specific decoder,
LLM method for the RIMSA control in comparison to the
generating physically constrained predictions for phase cor-
channel estimation based approach and existing traditional
rection and channel estimation. As illustrated in Fig. 4, this
deep learning methods.
dual-head architecture processes the LLM backbone outputs
X RNP through parallel task branches.
LLM
Phas ∈ e optimization head consists of feature expansion, A. Simulation Parameters
nonlinear processing and phase constraint. Feature expansion We consider a RIMSA assisted multiuser MISO commu-
expands latent space dimensions via fully-connected layer: nication system as illustrated in Fig. 3, consisting of a BS
X(
p
1
ha
)
se
=W
p ·
X
LLM
+b
p
, (cid:0) W
p ∈
RNP×1024(cid:1) . (30) e
R
q
F
ui
c
p
h
p
a
e
i
d
ns
w
. A
ith
s
a
sh
R
ow
IM
n
S
in
A
th
w
e
hi
F
c
i
h
g.
h
3
a
,
s
t
1
h
0
e
2
(
4
x;
el
y
e
;
m
z
e
)
n
-c
ts
oo
a
r
n
d
d
ina
1
t
2
e
8
s
Nonlinear processing applies GELU activation and layer-
of the BS locations in meters is (0, 0, 20). There are 3 users
norm for stable gradient flow:
uniformly distributed in a rectangular area [20,30] [20,30]
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17) ×
X(2) =LayerNorm GELU X(1) R1024. (31) inthe(x,y)-planewithz=1.5asshowninFig.3.Weassume
phase phase ∈ thattheRIMSAisequippedwithauniformplanararrayplaced
Phase constraint enforces physical limits ( π,π) through on the (y, z)-plane in a 32 32 configuration, the RF chains
−
Hardtanh: are placed similar to RIMS × A on the (y, z)-plane in a 16 8
(cid:16) (cid:17) ×
V=Hardtanh X(2) π RNt. (32) configuration. K is the ratio between the power in the LoS
phase · ∈
pathandthepowerintheNLoSpaths.TheLoScomponentis
SimilartoRIMSAbeamformingmatrixV,thedigitalprecod-
position-dependent and is thus slow-time-varying; The NLoS
ing matrix W is generated from second phase optimization
components are caused by the multi-path effects and are thus
head with power constraint. fast-time-varying. The large-scale path loss of L is 10−4.
k
Channelestimationheadconsistsofhigh-dimensionalmap-
The path loss exponents are set as ρ =2.2. The uplink pilot
k
ping, LeakyReLU activation and dimension reshaping. High-
transmitpowerandthedownlinkdatatransmitpoweraresetto
dimensional mapping projects features to 2048D space for
be15dBmand20dBm,andtheuplinknoisepoweris-100dBm
detailed reconstruction as:
and the downlink noise power is -80dBm unless otherwise
X(
ch
1
a
)
nnel
=W
c ·
X
LLM
+b
c
, (cid:0) W
c ∈
RNP×2048(cid:1) . (33) stated. The training dataset and validation dataset respectively

---PAGE---

9
contain10,000and2000samples.Thetestingdatasetcontains One Channel Block Length: K
5000 samples.
Uplink Pilot Downlink Data Uplink Pilot Downlink Data
This work introduces a hybrid optimization network archi- Transmission Transmission Transmission Transmission
tecture based on GPT-2, designed to capture spatio-temporal Channel Channel
Precoding Precoding
Estimation Estimation
channel evolution patterns and optimize phase, channel esti-
mation, and precoding matrices through a multi-task learning One Channel Episode
framework. Specifically configured with an input preprocess-
One Channel Block Length: K
ing module for complex feature fusion and temporal feature
Uplink Pilot Downlink Data Uplink Pilot Downlink Data
extraction using dilated causal convolutions, it also includes a
Transmission Transmission Transmission Transmission
spatio-temporal joint encoding module featuring bidirectional
DRL Process DRL Control DRL Process DRL Control
LSTM for capturing long-term dependencies and a hybrid
attention mechanism for processing sequence and feature
One Channel Episode
dimensions.ThebackbonenetworkadoptsacustomizedGPT-
2 configuration with parameters fine-tuned only for position Fig. 6. The frame structure of the typical TDD multi-user MIMO and the
correspondingsignalprocessingproceduresforDRLmethod.
encoding and layer normalization, while employing a multi-
task output head strategy that encompasses phase prediction,
channelestimation,andprecodingprediction,eachtailoredfor Nooptimization:RIMSAconfigurationsaresetrandomly
specific tasks like phase range constraint and spatial continu- • serve as the baseline.
ity smoothing. Additionally, a residual optimization module
To ensure fairness, the above deep learning-based methods
enhances the architecture with cascaded residual blocks and
process antenna dimensions in parallel and adopt sum data
channel attention. This model, comprising tens of million
rate as the loss function for training.
parameters, achieves end-to-end latency of less than 20ms on
an NVIDIA RTX4090 GPU, demonstrating efficient inference
B. Training and Inference Cost
performance.Throughitscomprehensivedesign,thisarchitec-
ture effectively integrates cross-modal feature alignment and In this subsection, we show the training and inference cost
spatio-temporal dynamics for communication systems. of LLM, GNN, and DRL in controlling the RIMSA.
TheproposedGNN-basedframeworkforRIMSAoptimiza-
The model optimization employs a multi-stage training
tion adopts a multi-head GAT architecture to model spatial
strategy with key hyper parameters as follows: The optimizer
is AdamW (β = 0.9, β = 0.999), utilizing gradient correlations among RIMSA elements. The framework con-
1 2
tains three key components: a geometric graph constructor
accumulation over 4 steps to achieve an effective batch size
of 4096. The learning rate starts at 3 10−4 and is dy- that generates adjacency matrices based on RIMSA element
× coordinates with 32 32 planar array and 16 8 RF chains,
namically adjusted using a triangular OneCycle scheduling × ×
method, whichvaries therate between 3 10−4 and 1 10−5 connecting each element to its horizontal/vertical neighbors;
× × hybrid node features combining real/imaginary channel com-
to balance convergence speed and stability. Regularization
techniques include a weight decay of 1 10−6 for l -norm ponents across 3 users into 6-dimensional feature vectors; a
2
× three-layer GAT with 3-head attention and hidden dimension
penalty and gradient clipping with a threshold of 1.0 to
as 64 for hierarchical spatial feature extraction. The first
prevent exploding gradients. The training protocol spans 500
GAT layer applies LeakyReLU activated multi-head attention
epochs, with early stopping triggered if the validation SINR
to project features into 768-D space, followed by ReLU-
plateaus for 20 consecutive epochs. Mixed-precision training
activated and linear GAT layers that progressively aggregate
(FP16/FP32) is implemented via PyTorch AMP (Automatic
neighbor information. The final phase prediction module uses
Mixed Precision) to enhance memory efficiency. This config-
batch normalization and tanh-activated dense layers to map
uration ensures stable optimization of large-scale parameters
node embeddings to [ π,π] phase shifts, enabling end-to-end
while preserving the physical constraints intrinsic to RIMSA- −
optimization of RIS configurations.
assisted communication systems.
The framework introduces two novel design principles:
To validate the superiority of the proposed method, sev-
First, a system-level loss function directly maximizes the
eral model-based and deep learning-based channel prediction
sum data rate through differentiable ZF precoding simulation.
methods are implemented as baselines as follows:
Givenpredictedphases,thelosscomputesequivalentchannels,
DRL [32]: A deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) derives ZF precoding matrices via regularized matrix inver-
•
framework, featuring a dual-network architecture (actor- sion, and evaluates SINR-based spectral efficiency through
critic) for continuous phase-shift optimization. The actor automatic differentiation. Second, a dynamic graph attention
network uses three fully connected layers to map pilots mechanism adaptively reweights neighbor connections based
to RIMSA configurations. on channel state differences - elements with highly correlated
GNN [28]: A graph attention network (GAT) models channels receive stronger attention coefficients. Training em-
•
RIMSA elements as nodes in a spatial graph. Each node ploysAdamoptimizationwithbatchsizeas32,usingsumdata
aggregates features from 4 nearest neighbors, using three rate as the primary metric. The adjacency matrix sparsity (4
GAT layers with hidden dimension as 64 to capture connections/element) ensures real-time operation with about
interference correlations. 50 ms inference latency per RIS configuration.

---PAGE---

10
TABLEII 9
THEDEPLOYMENTCOSTOFDIFFERENTMETHODSONRIMSACONTROL
LLM method
8 GNN method
Method Parameters Trainingtime Interferencetime DRL method
Random
LLM 1.73/84.78M 2.6h 20ms 7
GNN 2.12/2.12M 4.8h 50ms
)z
H
DRL 2.36/2.36M 7.3h 120ms
/sp
b6
(
e
ta
TABLEIII
r
a ta
d
5
THEDETAILSOFLLMWITHDIFFERENTNUMBERSOFGPT-2LAYERS m u
S4
Layers Sumdatarate Parameters Interferencetime
3
LLM(2) 7.01bps/Hz 1.72/55.37M 13ms
LLM(4) 9.62bps/Hz 1.73/70.26M 17ms
LLM(6) 9.79bps/Hz 1.73/84.78M 20ms 2
15 30 45 60 75 90
LLM(8) 9.73bps/Hz 1.74/99.12M 28ms
Pilot length
Fig. 7. Performance of the proposed methods for RIMSA system with
differentpilotlength.
The LLM and GNN methods can directly get the optimal
RIMSAconfigurations,whileDRLmethodneedsexplorations
to learn how to control RIMSA. So the training dataset for
We compare the model training and inference cost of the
DRL is a little different, but the testing dataset is same as
proposed method with other baselines to assess the difficulty
LLM and GNN methods. In DRL simulation based on Fig. 6,
of deploying the model in RIMSA control, as shown in Tab.
wemaketwoassumptions:Channelblockcontainsuplinkpilot
II. All experiments are conducted on the same machine with
transmissionanddownlinkdatatransmissionphaseswithcon-
IntelCorei9-14900KCPU,NVIDIAGeForceRTX4090GPU,
stant channel matrices. Channel episode comprises 20 blocks
and 128 GB of RAM. Although LLM has the largest total
where the LoS component (fixed via random user placement)
parameters as 84.78M, the actual trainable parameters 1.73M
remainsstatic,whileNLoScomponentsvaryasi.i.d.processes
are similar to GNN and DRL models since most parameters
acrossblocks.Thissetupbalancesenvironmentalstabilitywith
in the LLM are frozen. And LLM method also has the
dynamic NLoS variations.
shortest training time as 2.6 hours. It is worth noting that
The proposed DRL-based optimization framework for LLM inference time is shorter than GNN and DRL thanks to
RIMSA systems adopts a DDPG architecture to address the inference acceleration specific to the GPT model. Therefore,
continuous phase-shift optimization problem. The framework LLM has the potential to serve real-time RIMSA control.
consists of three core components: a channel-aware environ- In addition, we comprehensively evaluated the impact of
ment that models RIMSA dynamics, an actor-critic network selectingdifferentnumbersofGPT-2layersonRIMSAcontrol
for joint policy learning and value estimation, and an experi- performance, parameters cost, and inference time, as shown
encereplaymechanismtostabilizetraining.Thestatespaceis in Tab. III where LLM (n) represents the proposed method
constructed from received pilot signals and estimated channel with n GPT-2 layers. The network parameters and inference
matrices obtained through LMMSE estimation using orthogo- time are both increased with the number of GPT-2 layers.
nal DFT pilots, concatenating real and imaginary components It is worth noting that the proposed model with 6 GPT-2
into a 768-dimensional vector. The action space defines phase layers performs the best within the testing range, indicating
shiftsforall1024elementsand128RFchains,boundedwithin that having more layers does not necessarily favor prediction.
[ π, π] through a tanh-activated actor network. The reward In practical deployment, the selection of the type and size of
− −
functionmaximizesthesumdataratebytheagentphase-shift the LLM backbone needs to consider both the requirements
decisions on RIMSA. for system performance and the constraints of device storage
To ensure robust learning, a hybrid exploration strategy and computational resources.
combines warm-up random sampling (1,000 steps) with tem-
porally correlated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise injection, bal-
C. Performance Evaluation
ancing exploration-exploitation trade-offs in high-dimensional
action spaces. And the network architecture employs dual Inthissubsection,weshownumericalresultsontheperfor-
hidden layers with 1024 neurons each and ReLU activation in manceofRIMSAassistedwirelesscommunicationscontrolled
bothactorandcriticnetworks,whiletargetnetworksaresoftly by LLM model. In this experiment, the number of training
updated to mitigate training divergence. Training leverages samples is set as 10,000, the number of validate samples is
mini-batch SGD with batch size as 64 and Adam optimiz- setas1,000andthenumberoftestingsamplesissetas2,000.
ers where actor/critic learning rates are set as 10−4/10−3, The Fig. 7 evaluates the sum data rate (bps/Hz) of four
minimizing the Bellman error via MSE loss on predicted Q- methods LLM, GNN, DRL, and random under varying pilot
values. Experimental validation confirms convergence within lengths in a large-scale RIMSA environment. Notably, prior
5,000 episodes, achieving real-time inference latency 120 ms studies have not rigorously tested DRL or GNN in such
on GPU hardware. complex multi-user, multi-RIMSA-element scenarios, which

---PAGE---

11
12 3
11
LLM method
2.5 GNN method
10
DRL method
)z LLM method )zH Random
H /sp
b (
e
ta r
a
ta d
m
u S
6
7
8
9 G
D
N
RL
N
m
m
e
e
t
t
h
h
o
o
d
d /sp
b ( etar
atad
n im
-x
aM
1.
2
5
5
1
4
3 0.5
16 18 20 22 24 26 15 30 45 60 75 90
Downlink transmit power P (dBm) Pilot length
Fig. 8. Performance of the proposed methods for RIMSA system with Fig. 9. Performance of the proposed methods for RIMSA system with
differenttransmittedpower. differentpilotlength.
introduceuniquechallengesduetohigh-dimensionalstateand GNN method (green line) follows as a sub-optimal solu-
action spaces. Among these methods, GNN demonstrates a tion, benefiting from its ability to model spatial interactions
significant advantage through its graph-structured modeling, among RIMSA elements and users. In contrast, the DRL
capturing spatial correlations between distributed RIMSA ele- method (blue line) lags significantly, as its high-dimensional
ments and users, thereby efficiently handling interference and state-action space (due to multi-user, multi-RIMSA-element
channelstatevariationsevenwithnumerousRIMSAelements. dynamics) hinders effective policy optimization. The LLM
At longer pilot lengths, GNN achieves near-optimal perfor- spatio-temporal attention mechanisms dynamically prioritize
mance, as extended pilots provide richer node interaction data criticaltransmissionpaths,outperformingDRLandGNN,un-
for graph-based optimization. In contrast, DRL struggles due derscoringitsadaptabilitytolargescalemetaelementscontrol.
totheexponentiallygrowingstate/actionspaces(e.g., (KNt) GNN graph-structured learning captures spatial correlations,
O
for K users and N RIMSA elements), which impedes policy ensuring steady performance gains, but its reliance on fixed
t
convergence, resulting in subpar performance. This curse of topology limits flexibility compared to LLM context-aware
dimensionality renders DRL trial-and-error exploration com- optimization.Meanwhile,DRLperformancesaturationreflects
putationally intractable, failing to adapt to dynamic multi- its inability to handle the combinatorial complexity of large-
elementinteractions.Thecriticalroleofpilotlengthisevident: scale RIMSA systems, where state spaces grow exponen-
for GNN, longer pilots enhance its ability to resolve multi- tially with users and elements. These results highlight LLM
user interference through high-resolution graph embeddings, dominance in high-power RIMSA deployments, while GNN
narrowing the performance gap with LLM. However, DRL remainsaviablealternativeformoderatescalability.Thestark
shows minimal gains, as its policy network saturates in high- performancegapsemphasizetheneedforintelligent,topology-
dimensionalspaces,unabletoexploitadditionalpilotresources adaptive frameworks in next-generation networks.
effectively. Meanwhile,the LLM method dominatesacross all The Fig. 9 evaluates the max-min data rate (bps/Hz) of
pilot lengths, attributed to its spatio-temporal attention mech- four methods LLM, GNN, DRL, and random in a RIMSA
anisms that adaptively prioritize critical RIMSA elements and system as pilot length increases, emphasizing how max-min
users. The LLM framework excels by adaptively prioritizing optimization addresses communication fairness. The LLM
criticalRIMSAelementsandusersthroughitsspatio-temporal method (red line) achieves the highest fairness performance,
attention mechanisms. This capability allows it to reach peak by explicitly optimizing the worst case user rate a critical
performance in data rates while requiring lower pilot resource metric for equitable service in multi-user networks. The GNN
consumption, thereby enabling efficient and effective large- method(greenline)followswithsteadygains,whiletheDRL
scaleRIMSAdeploymentswithouttheneedforexcessivepilot method(blueline)andrandommethod(blackline)lagsignifi-
lengths. Thus, even under conditions of reduced pilot over- cantly,underscoringtheirlimitationsinbalancingfairnessand
head, the LLM approach manages to identify and implement efficiency. Max-min optimization is pivotal for fairness as it
the best possible RIMSA configurations, enhancing overall prioritizestheweakestuserrate,ensuringnouserisleftbehind
system performance in complex, multi-user environments. due to interference or poor channel conditions; This approach
The Fig. 8 evaluates the sum data rate (bps/Hz) of three directly tackles fairness challenges in RIMSA systems, where
methods LLM, GNN, and DRL for a RIMSA system under usersnearcelledgesorblockedbyobstaclesoftensufferfrom
varying downlink transmit power. The LLM method (red severe rate imbalances. The LLM method excels by lever-
line) consistently achieves the highest performance, demon- aging spatio-temporal attention mechanisms to dynamically
strating its robustness in leveraging increased transmit power allocatepilotresourcesandbeamforminggainstounderserved
for adaptive beamforming and interference management. The users, achieving performance growth and balancing spectral

---PAGE---

12
9
11
8
10
)z
H /sp b ( e
ta
r a ta
d
7
8
9 L
G D
L
N R
M
L N m
m
m e
e
e t
t
t h
h
h o
o
o d
d
d
)z H
/sp b ( e ta
r
a ta d
m
5
6
7 P
P P
i
i i
l
l l
o
o o
t
t t
l
l l
e
e e
n
n n
g
g g
t
t t
h
h h
3
4 6
0
5 0
m u
u S4
S 6
3
5
2
4 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500
3 4 5 6 7 8 Training epoch
User number
Fig. 11. Performance of LLM for RIMSA system with different training
Fig. 10. Performance of the proposed methods for RIMSA system with epoch.
differentusernumbers.
lotlengths45and30,underscoringthecriticalroleofextended
efficiencywithfairnessasmorepilotsbecomeavailable.These
pilots in enhancing channel estimation accuracy and interfer-
results demonstrate that as highlighted by LLM dominance,
ence management. Shorter pilots saturate earlier with limited
showinghowadvancedalgorithmscanmitigateratestarvation
gains, while longer pilots sustain gradual improvements until
for disadvantaged users and ensure uniform quality of service
350 epochs, leveraging additional training to optimize high-
(QoS),acornerstonefor6Gnetworksdemandingultra-reliable
dimensionalpilot-resourceinteractions.However,theextended
and inclusive connectivity.
training requirement for pilot length 45 highlights a trade-
The Fig. 10 evaluates the sum data rate (bps/Hz) of three
offbetweenperformancegainsandcomputationalcomplexity.
methods in a RIMSA system with user numbers ranging from
These results validate that longer pilots significantly boost
3to8,wherepilotlengthisexplicitlysetto15 theusercount
× RIMSA system performance when paired with LLM adap-
(e.g., 45 for 3 users), reflecting the practical need to scale
tive training, but optimal deployment must balance spectral
pilot resources proportionally with user density for sufficient
efficiency with training overhead.
channel estimation accuracy in multi-user environments. The
LLMmethod(redline)maintainssuperiorperformanceacross
alluserscales,asitsadaptivespatio-temporalattentiondynam- VI. CONCLUSION
ically optimizes pilot utilization while avoiding interference
This paper presents LLM-RIMSA, a new framework that
saturation despite growing pilot overhead. The GNN method
integrates LLMs with RIMSA to address the limitations
(green line) shows steady growth by modeling user-RIMSA
of conventional model-based optimization and DL in high-
spatial correlations via graph learning; however, at higher
dimensional RIMSA control tasks. By resolving critical lim-
user counts, its fixed graph topology struggles to fully exploit
itations of conventional RIS designs such as frequency se-
extended pilot sequences, limiting gains compared to LLM.
lectivity, propagation delays, and restricted amplitude control,
In contrast, the DRL method (blue line) suffers from scala-
RIMSA enables unprecedented flexibility in dynamic beam-
bility bottlenecks, as the state-action space dimension grows
forming and multi-user interference suppression. By leverag-
exponentially with pilot length, rendering policy exploration
ingthecontextualreasoningandfew-shotlearningcapabilities
intractable. The 15 pilot-user relationship highlights a fun-
× of LLMs, the framework eliminates dependency on explicit
damental trade-off: longer pilots enhance channel estimation
channel estimation while achieving real-time adaptive opti-
but demand intelligent methods (like LLM) to mitigate over-
mization of RIMSA configurations. Simulations demonstrate
head, while shorter pilots reduce overhead but risk inaccurate
significantperformancegains,lowtrainingandinferencecosts
estimation, penalizing fairness and efficiency. The widening
than traditional DL method.
performance gaps between methods as users and pilots scale
This breakthrough transforms RIMSA from passive hard-
underscore LLM unique ability to balance spectral efficiency
ware into cognitive entities capable of self-optimization in
with pilot-resource constraints, making it indispensable for
complex radio environments. Future work will focus on LLM
large scale RIMSA deployments.
deployment for edge devices to advance LLM-driven intelli-
The Fig. 11 evaluates the sum data rate (bps/Hz) of the
gent surfaces toward practical 6G applications.
LLM for the RIMSA system across training epochs (0-500)
under three pilot lengths: 30 (red), 45 (green), and 60 (blue).
All curves exhibit a rapid initial improvement in data rate, REFERENCES
gradually stabilizing after 250 epochs, reflecting the model
[1] Z. Chen, Z. Zhang, and Z. Yang, “Big AI models for 6G wireless net-
convergence.Longerpilotsconsistentlyachievehigherperfor-
works:Opportunities,challenges,andresearchdirections,”IEEEWireless
mance,withthepilotlength60(blue)curveoutperformingpi- Commun.,earlyaccess,Jul.1,2024,doi:10.1109/MWC.015.2300404.

---PAGE---

13
[2] J.Bai,Q.Yan,H.-M.WangandY.Liu,“IntelligentReflectingSurface [24] A. Muhammad, M. Elhattab, M. A. Arfaoui, A. Al-Hilo, and C. Assi,
Aided Green Communication With Deployment Optimization,” IEEE “Age of information optimization in RIS-assisted wireless networks,”
Trans.Commun.,vol.72,no.8,pp.5130-5144,Aug.2024. IEEETrans.Netw.Ser.Manage.,vol.21,no.1,pp.925-938,Feb.2024.
[3] T.Gongetal.,“HolographicMIMOcommunications:Theoreticalfoun- [25] R.Zhong,Y.Liu,X.Mu,Y.Chen,andL.Song,“AIempoweredRIS-
dations, enabling technologies, and future directions,” IEEE Commun. assisted NOMA networks: Deep learning or reinforcement learning?”
SurveysTuts.,vol.26,no.1,pp.196-257,1stQuart.,2024. IEEEJ.Sel.AreasCommun.,vol.40,no.1,pp.182-196,Jan.2022.
[4] M. Di Renzo, A. Zappone, M. Debbah, M.-S. Alouini, C. Yuen, J. [26] M. Ahmed et al., “A comprehensive survey of artificial intelligence
de Rosny, and S. Tretyakov, “Smart radio environments empowered by advances in RIS-assisted wireless networks,” Authorea Preprints, Aug.
reconfigurable intelligent surfaces: How it works, state of research, and 2024.
theroadahead,”IEEEJ.Sel.AreasCommun.,vol.38,no.11,pp.2450- [27] C. Huang et al., “Multi-Hop RIS-Empowered Terahertz Communica-
2525,2020. tions: A DRL-Based Hybrid Beamforming Design,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
[5] Q. Wu and R.Zhang, “Intelligent Reflecting Surface Enhanced Wireless Commun.,vol.39,no.6,pp.1663-1677,June2021,
NetworkviaJointActiveandPassiveBeamforming,”IEEETrans.Wire- [28] T.Jiang,H.V.ChengandW.Yu,“LearningtoReflectandtoBeamform
lessCommun.,vol.18,no.11,pp.5394-5409,Nov.2019. for Intelligent Reflecting Surface With Implicit Channel Estimation,”
[6] Q.Wu and R. Zhang, “Joint Active and Passive Beamforming Opti- IEEEJ.Sel.AreasCommun.,vol.39,no.7,pp.1931-1945,July2021,
mization for Intelligent Reflecting Surface Assisted SWIPT Under QoS [29] J.H. Wanget al.,“Interplay betweenRISand AIin wirelesscommu-
Constraints,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol.38, no.8, pp.1735-1748, nications: Fundamentals, architectures, applications, and open research
Aug.2020. problems,”IEEEJ.Sel.AreasCommun.,vol.39,no.8,pp.2271-2288,
[7] S.ZhangandR.Zhang,“CapacityCharacterizationforIntelligentReflect- Aug.2021.
ingSurfaceAidedMIMOCommunication,”IEEEJ.Sel.AreasCommun., [30] W.WangandW.Zhang,“IntelligentReflectingSurfaceConfigurations
vol.38,no.8,pp.1823-1838,Aug.2020. forSmartRadioUsingDeepReinforcementLearning,”IEEEJ.Sel.Areas
[8] C.Huang,A.Zappone,G.C.Alexandropoulos,M.DebbahandC.Yuen, Commun.,vol.40,no.8,pp.2335-2346,Aug.2022.
“Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces for Energy Efficiency in Wireless [31] Y.Huang,H.-M.Wang,Z.WangandW.Liu,“PilotBackdoorAttack
Communication,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. againstDeepReinforcementLearningEmpoweredIntelligentReflection
4157-4170,Aug.2019. SurfaceforSmartRadio,”IEEETrans.WirelessCommun.,earlyaccess,
[9] L. Dong and H. -M. Wang, “Enhancing secure MIMO transmission via Mar.42025,doi:10.1109/TWC.2025.3545066.
intelligent reflecting surface,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 19, [32] Z. Zhang, T. Jiang, and W. Yu, “Learning based user scheduling in
no.11,pp.7543–7556,Nov.2020. reconfigurable intelligent surface assisted multiuser downlink,” IEEE J.
[10] W. Lv, J. Bai, Q. Yan and H. M. Wang, “RIS-Assisted Green Secure Sel.TopicsSignalProcess.,vol.16,no.5,pp.1026-1039,Aug.2022.
Communications:ActiveRISorPassiveRIS?,”IEEEWirelessCommun. [33] B. Lim and M. Vu, “Distributed Graph-Based Learning for User
Lett.,vol.12,no.2,pp.237-241,Feb.2023. Association and Beamforming Design in Multi-RIS Multi-Cell Net-
[11] S. Zeng et al., “Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces in 6G: Reflective, works,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., early access, Mar.24 2025,
Transmissive,orBoth?,”IEEECommun.Lett.,vol.25,no.6,pp.2063- doi:10.1109/TWC.2025.3551763.
2067,Jun.2021. [34] Z.Wang,Y.Huang,W.LiuandH.-M.Wang,“MaliciousAttacksand
[12] N. Shlezinger, O. Dicker, Y. C. Eldar, I. Yoo, M. F. Imani, and D. Defenses for Deep-Reinforcement-Learning-Based Dynamic Spectrum
R. Smith, “Dynamic metasurface antennas for uplink massive MIMO Access,”IEEEInternetThingsJ,vol.12,no.8,pp.10127-10138,Apr.,
systems,”IEEETrans.Commun.,vol.67,no.10,pp.6829-6843,2019. 2025.
[13] M.RezvaniandR.Adve,“Channelestimationfordynamicmetasurface [35] B.-J.Chen,R.Y.Chang,F.-T.ChienandH.V.Poor,“GraphNeural
antennas,”IEEETrans.WirelessCommun.,vol.23,no.6,pp.5832-5846, Network-BasedJointBeamformingforHybridRelayandReconfigurable
2024. Intelligent Surface Aided Multiuser Systems,” IEEE Wireless Commun.
[14] R. Deng, B. Di, H. Zhang, D. Niyato, Z. Han, H. V. Poor, and L. Lett.,vol.12,no.10,pp.1811-1815,Oct.2023
Song, “Reconfigurable holographic surfaces for future wireless commu- [36] K. Qiu, S. Bakirtzis, I. Wassell, H. Song, J. Zhang and K. Wang,
nications,”IEEETrans.WirelessCommun.,vol.28,no.6,pp.126-131, “LargeLanguageModel-BasedWirelessNetworkDesign,”IEEEWireless
2021. Commun.Lett.,vol.13,no.12,pp.3340-3344,Dec.2024
[15] O¨. T. Demir, E. Bjrnson, and L. Sanguinetti, “Channel modeling and [37] L.Bariah,Q.Zhao,H.Zou,Y.Tian,F.Bader,andM.Debbah,“Large
channel estimation for holographic massive MIMO with planar arrays,” generativeAImodelsfortelecom:Thenextbigthing?”IEEECommun.
IEEEWirelessCommun.Lett.,vol.11,no.5,pp.997-1001,2022. Mag.,earlyaccess,Jan.8,2024.
[16] A. Alkhateeb, O. El Ayach, G. Leus, and R. W. Heath, “Channel [38] H.Duetal.,“EnablingAI-GeneratedContentServicesinWirelessEdge
estimation and hybrid precoding for millimeter wave cellular systems,” Networks,”IEEEWirelessCommun.,2024,pp.1-9.
IEEEJ.Sel.TopicsSignalProcess.,vol.8,no.5,pp.831-846,Oct.2014. [39] L. Dong et al., “LAMBO: Large AI Model Empowered Edge Intelli-
[17] H.Zhou,M.Erol-Kantarci,Y.Liu,andH.V.Poor,“Asurveyonmodel gence,”IEEECommun.Mag.,vol.63,no.4,pp.88-94,April2025,
based, heuristic, and machine learning optimization approaches in RIS [40] F.Jiangetal.,“LargeLanguageModelEnhancedMulti-AgentSystems
aided wireless networks,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 26, no. 2, for 6G Communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun. , vol. 31, no. 6, pp.
pp.781-823,2ndQuart.,2024. 48-55,December2024
[18] J.Bai,H.-M.WangandP.Liu,“RobustIRS-AidedSecrecyTransmis- [41] B. Liu, X. Liu, S. Gao, X. Cheng, and L. Yang, “LLM4CP: Adapting
sionWithLocationOptimization,”IEEETrans.Commun.,vol.70,no.9, largelanguagemodelsforchannelprediction,”J.Commun.Inf.Networks,
pp.6149-6163,Sept.2022. vol.9,no.2,pp.113-125,Jun.2024.
[19] H. -M. Wang, J. Bai and L. Dong, “Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces [42] H. Zhou et al., “Large Language Model (LLM) for Telecommuni-
AssistedSecureTransmissionWithoutEavesdropper’sCSI,”IEEESignal cations: A Comprehensive Survey on Principles, Key Techniques, and
Proc.Lett,,vol.27,pp.1300-1304,2020. Opportunities,”IEEECommun.SurveysTuts.,earlyaccess,Sep.232024,
[20] Z.Peng,R.Weng,C.Pan,G.Zhou,M.D.RenzoandA.L.Swindle- doi:10.1109/COMST.2024.3465447.
hurst, “Robust Transmission Design for RIS-Assisted Secure Multiuser [43] J. Su et al., “Large language models for forecasting and anomaly
Communication Systems in the Presence of Hardware Impairments,” detection:Asystematicliteraturereview,”arXiv:2402.10350,2024.
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 7506-7521, Nov. [44] M.Jinetal.,“Time-llm:Timeseriesforecastingbyreprogramminglarge
2023. languagemodels,”arXiv:2310.01728,2023.
[21] H. Liu, Y. Zhang, S. Gong, W. Shen, C. Xing and J. An, “Optimal [45] Y. Ren, Y. Chen, S. Liu, B. Wang, H. Yu, and Z. Cui, “TPLLM: A
Transmission Strategy and Time Allocation for RIS-Enhanced Partially trafficpredictionframeworkbasedonpretrainedlargelanguagemodels,”
WPSNs,”IEEETrans.WirelessCommun.,vol.21,no.9,pp.7207-7221, arXiv:2403.02221,2024.
Sept.2022. [46] A. Celik and A. M. Eltawil, “At the dawn of generative AI era: A
[22] A. L. Moustakas, G. C. Alexandropoulos and M. Debbah, “Reconfig- tutorial-cum-survey on new frontiers in 6G wireless intelligence,” IEEE
urable Intelligent Surfaces and Capacity Optimization: A Large System OpenJ.Commun.Soc.,vol.5,pp.2433-2489,2024.
Analysis,”IEEETrans.WirelessCommun.,vol.22,no.12,pp.8736-8750, [47] F.Jiang,Y.Peng,L.Dong,K.Wang,K.Yang,C.Pan,D.Niyato,and
Dec.2023. O. A. Dobre, “Large language model enhanced multi-agent systems for
[23] X.Chengetal.,“JointOptimizationforRIS-AssistedWirelessCommu- 6Gcommunications,”IEEEWirelessCommun.,earlyaccess,Aug.2024.
nications:FromPhysicalandElectromagneticPerspectives,”IEEETrans. [48] J. Shao et al., “WirelessLLM: Empowering Large Language Models
Commun.,vol.70,no.1,pp.606-620,Jan.2022. TowardsWirelessIntelligence,”J.Commun.Inf.Networks,vol.9,no.2,
pp.99-112,June2024

---PAGE---

